From Tables to Signals: Revealing Spectral Adaptivity in TabPFN
Jianqiao Zheng* Cameron Gordon* Yiping Ji Hemanth Saratchandran Simon Lucey
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
University of Adelaide
{first.last}@adelaide.edu.au
*Equal contribution
Abstract
Task-agnostic tabular foundation models such as
TabPFN have achieved impressive performance on tabular
learning tasks, yet the origins of their inductive biases re-
main poorly understood. In this work, we study TabPFN
through the lens of signal reconstruction and provide the
first frequency-based analysis of its in-context learning be-
havior. We show that TabPFN possesses a broader effective
frequency capacity than standard ReLU-MLPs, even with-
out hyperparameter tuning. Moreover, unlike MLPs whose
spectra evolve primarily over training epochs, we find that
TabPFN’s spectral capacity adapts directly to the number of
samples provided in-context, a phenomenon we termSpec-
tral Adaptivity. We further demonstrate that positional en-
coding modulates TabPFN’s frequency response, mirroring
classical results in implicit neural representations. Finally,
we show that these properties enable TabPFN to perform
training-free and hyperparameter-free image denoising, il-
lustrating its potential as a task-agnostic implicit model.
Our analysis provides new insight into the structure and in-
ductive biases of tabular foundation models and highlights
their promise for broader signal reconstruction tasks.
1. Introduction
Task agnostic in-context learning approaches - of which
TabPFN is a leading example - have recently revolutionized
tabular machine learning [24, 24]. These Prior Fitted Net-
works (PFNs) trained on synthetic data are found to have
strong performance without the need for selecting induc-
tive biases [20, 21, 31]. However, the properties of tabular
foundation models are still not well understood - with most
works currently treating them as a highly effective but mys-
terious black-box. In parallel, over the last decade implicit
neural representations (INRs) have revolutionized the field
of machine learning [57]. INRs seek to reconstruct signals
implicitly through the trained weights of a neural network
T abPFN
0.2× Nyquist
 1.0× Nyquist
 8× Nyquist
ReLU
ReLU+PE
Figure 1. Signal reconstruction results at various sampling rates
(columns) using TabPFN, ReLU-MLPs, and ReLU-MLPs with
positional encoding (PE). ReLU-MLPs fail to reconstruct high-
frequency components regardless of the amount of data provided,
indicating that their spectrum is essentially insensitive to the num-
ber of samples. Positional encoding methods can extend their
high-frequency capacity; however, hyperparameters tuned for one
sampling rate (rightmost column) may cause unstable and noisy
reconstructions at other sampling rates (leftmost column), requir-
ing careful task-specific selection. In contrast, we find that the
spectral capacity of TabPFN naturally adapts to the number of con-
text samples—a phenomenon we refer to asSpectral Adaptivity.
[57]. As they can be used to approximately reconstruct a
fixedexplicitsignal - such as a 1D signal or 2D image -
they act as a useful test bed for understanding the theoret-
ical inductive priors within neural networks, architectures,
and optimizers [46, 47]. By examining tabular foundation
models through this lens we can demonstrate that in con-
trast to ReLU-MLPs whose spectral properties evolve dur-
ing the course of gradient descent [38], TabPFN has a spec-
tral bias that is controlled with the number ofsamplespro-
vided to the in-context window. We show that - similar to
work in implicit neural representations - that the inductive
biases found in in-context models can be controlled with ap-
propriate positional encoding. In this paper, we propose to
1
arXiv:2511.18278v1  [cs.LG]  23 Nov 2025

provide a partial explanatory lens to TabPFN by examining
these models through a signal reconstruction lens - bridging
results with rapidly developing theoretical understanding in
the properties of implicit neural representations.
Our paper has two audiences: the first is the tabular ma-
chine learning community, who may benefit from the bridge
to theoretical tools for understanding the learning properties
of tabular foundation models. Secondly, within the implicit
neural representation community, it is often underappreci-
ated that different signal domains necessitate models with
specifically manipulated inductive biases to perform opti-
mally. This involves an onerous, domain-specific search
over architecture, hyperparameter, and optimizer configu-
rations in order to achieve strong performance highlight-
ing that no single ‘one-size-fits-all’ model exists [26]. For
those we wish to highlight the potential for task-agnostic
in-context models to be performant for signal reconstruc-
tion tasks without hyperparameter tuning. While the current
context limitations of models render large implicit neural
tasks - such as Neural Radiance Fields [30] - infeasible at
the current time, we believe this path will be one of grow-
ing importance as research to overcome the limitations of
context windows continues its rapid development [18, 50].
Our contributions include:
1. We apply frequency-based signal analysis to examine
the in-context learning behavior of TabPFN. Similar to
ReLU-MLPs, we show that TabPFN exhibits a bias to-
ward predicting low-frequency components, and that po-
sitional encoding can partially alleviate this bias.
2. Unlike MLPs, we find that the spectral capacity of
TabPFN naturally adapts to the number of context sam-
ple, a phenomenon we refer to asSpectral Adaptivity.
3. We show that TabPFN can be applied directly with-
out fine-tuning to signal reconstruction tasks, enabling
training-free and hyperparameter-free image denoising.
Paper overview: Section 3 develops our theoretical
framework, introducing the context kernel and formalising
spectral adaptivity for in-context models. Section 4 then
explores an expository 1D signal-reconstruction task as mi-
croscope to examine TabPFN’s inductive biases, contrasting
it with ReLU-MLPs. Section 5 lifts this lens to a 2D in-
verse problem, building a training-free TabPFN pipeline for
denoising and comparing it against standard INR baselines.
Section 6 examines how positional encodings can act as fre-
quency “dials” for TabPFN enabling it to learn higher fre-
quency details with fewer samples - a result which provides
insight to a recent methodological trend showing that po-
sitional encoding is required to use TabPFN for time-series
data [22]), and Section 7 concludes with limitations and im-
plications for future tabular and vision applications.
2. Related Work
2.1. In-Context Tabular Learning
In-Context Learning (ICL) has been emerged as a key
paradigm in which models perform tasks by analyzing
prompts containing input-output pairs, without explicit
training or parameter updates [3, 8, 35, 56]. Recently,
TabPFN - a family of in-context models that apply a trans-
former trained to approximate posterior predictive distribu-
tions over synthetic tasks - has emerged as the leading tab-
ular foundational model for small datasets [10, 18, 20, 21,
24, 31]. These models have been applied to multiple tasks
including time-series modeling [22], reinforcement learn-
ing [49], traffic forecasting [25], and medical data analysis
[54]. Intriguingly, TabPFN has shown a remarkable ability
to transfer without fine-tuning to new domains with prop-
erly encoded data. For example, [9, 19] find that TabPFN
is able to solve graph problems formulated in a tabular for-
mat. In some cases, such as for time-series data, this has
required the positional encoding or Fourier domain conver-
sion of certain features for strong performance [5, 22, 25].
The practical utility of TabPFN has meant that there is
significant interest in understanding its properties beyond a
black-box. However, to date there are only a papers explor-
ing its properties. For example, by exploring the decision-
boundaries in input spaces [28], the statistical properties of
Prior-Fitted Networks [32], robustness to noise injection or
corrupted data [33, 36], or by examining how heterogeneity
is handled [60]. In addition, there is significant interest in
scaling to larger context windows, either through architec-
tural modification [18, 21, 37], data reduction [13, 14, 27],
or tiling and hierarchical inference strategies [50, 60].
2.2. Signal Reconstruction
Signal reconstruction is a core problem in vision and signal
processing. The Shannon–Nyquist theorem [34, 51] states
that a band-limited function with maximum frequencyωis
fully determined by samples taken at rate2ω. While this
bound describes the worst-case sampling requirements for
broadband signals, additional structure - such as sparsity
or smoothness - can enable accurate recovery from sub-
stantially fewer samples [4]. INRs build on this princi-
ple of domain-agnostic approximation by parameterizing
a continuous signal as a coordinate-based neural network
[11, 29, 52, 57]. This framework has transformed several
areas of computer vision: for instance, NeRF methods treat
radiance fields as continuous functions and achieve high-
quality novel-view synthesis from sparse observations [16,
30]. In scientific machine learning, Physics-Informed Neu-
ral Networks (PINNs) extend this idea by embedding physi-
cal constraints directly into the coordinate-based model, en-
abling reliable reconstruction of solution fields even with
extremely limited measurements [40, 43]. A growing body
2

0 0.5
0.03 0.7
0.97 0.3
1 0.5
0.2
0.4
0.79
0.03
TabPFN(            ,    ) 
Figure 2. Recasting 1-D signal as tabular dataset. By representing
sampled points(x i, yi)as rows of a table, TabPFN can be applied
to signal reconstruction: the model predictsˆyfor query inputs(ˆx)
in a single forward pass. Framing signals as tabular data enables
analysis of TabPFN from a signal reconstruction perspective.
of theoretical work seeks to explain why INRs are effective
signal models - connecting activation functions, curvature
constraints, sampling behavior, and invertibility to the types
of frequencies a network can represent [7, 46–48]. These
analyses provide a principled lens for understanding how
neural architectures implicitly shape the reconstruction of
continuous signals. We adopt this reconstruction viewpoint
for TabPFN. By recasting signals as tabular datasets and
analyzing TabPFN through a sampling-theoretic lens, we
connect its in-context learning behavior to the rapidly de-
veloping theory behind INRs and reveal how its frequency
response adapts to the number of context samples.
2.3. Spectral Bias in Neural Networks
Neural networks are known to exhibit a simplicity or spec-
tral bias: they tend to fit low-complexity, low-frequency
structure before high-frequency detail [2, 6, 15]. This has
been demonstrated both empirically [1, 59] and supported
theoretically via Fourier analysis for both ReLU [38] and
sigmoid MLPs [58]. Related work on coordinate-based
INRs [42] shows that increasing network bandwidth can
suppress low frequencies unless explicit priors (e.g., acti-
vation choices) are provided. Additionally, positional en-
codings have been analyzed from a frequency-domain per-
spective to reveal how they shape learned spectral content
[61]. Despite this growing literature, the spectral behaviour
of tabular foundation models remains largely unexplored.
Our work helps to address this gap.
3. Spectral Properties of TabPFN
In this section, we aim to theoretically compare the fre-
quency response characteristics of optimization-based mod-
els (e.g., ReLU-MLPs) and in-context learning models
(e.g., TabPFN). Building upon the concepts of Neural Tan-
gent Kernel (NTK) and spectral bias for optimization-based
models, we introduce the notions ofcontext kerneland
spectral adaptivityto describe in-context learning models.
3.1. Problem Setup
For simplicity, we consider a 1-D signal representation
problem. Let the ground-truth function bey=a(x), x∈
[0,1], and let the training dataset beD N ={(x i, yi)}N
i=1.
Our goal is to learn a model that approximates this function.
Performance is evaluated using the mean squared error on
a set of test (or query) pointsq j. Fig. 2 illustrates how an
in-context learning model addresses this problem.
3.2. Preliminaries: Spectral Bias of ReLU-MLPs
To address the 1-D signal representation problem using a
ReLU-MLP modelf(x;θ)trained via gradient descent, the
standard objective isL(θ)= 1
N
PN
i=1 ∥f(x i;θ)−y i∥2 Un-
der the assumptions of the NTK regime [23], the training
dynamics can be approximated by kernel regression. The
Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) is defined as
KNTK =

∇θf(X;θ)
⊤
∇θf(X;θ).(1)
Let the eigenvalue decomposition beK=QΛQ ⊤. Then,
the evolution of the function during training can be ex-
pressed as
ft(x) =
X
k

1−e −λkt
bk ϕk(x),(2)
whereλ k are the eigenvalues of the NTK, typically corre-
sponding to thek-th frequency componentϕ k(x), andtde-
notes the training epoch. During training, ReLU-MLPs tend
to fit low-frequency components first and progressively cap-
ture higher-frequency details as optimization proceeds.
Remark 1(Spectral Bias [38]).The spectral bias of ReLU-
MLPs arises from both the parameterization and the opti-
mization process. Given a fixed model architecture, initial-
ization, and optimizer, the number of training epochs effec-
tively governs the evolution of this spectral bias.
3.3. Spectral Bias of ReLU-MLPs is Data Agnostic
The NTK is an intrinsic property of a model that depends
on its architecture (e.g., number of layers, width, skip con-
nections, batch normalization) and initialization, as it is de-
termined by the model’s gradients with respect to its param-
eters [17, 23]. We refer to these factors collectively as the
parameterizationin Remark 1.
While it is well known that the spectral bias of
ReLU-MLPs evolves with training epochs, relatively few
works [55] have emphasized that this spectral bias is largely
3

1 32Eigen-index (k)
10 7
100Normalized eigenvalue
Empirical NTK eigenvalues
Depth
1
3
5
# samples
64
512
4096
Figure 3. Normalized eigenvalue spectra of the empirical NTKs
for ReLU-MLPs of varying depths, evaluated with 64, 512, and
4096 training samples. Across different sampling densities, the
eigenvalue decay profiles remain unchanged, whereas network
depth induces clear separations between curves. This demon-
strates that NTK spectral properties are determined by the model
architecture and are agnostic to the number of training samples.
independent of the number of training samples. Although
the NTK is computed from the training samples, it serves
only as a discrete approximation of an underlying continu-
ous kernel. Increasing the number of samples merely refines
this approximation; it does not alter the intrinsic spectrum
of the NTK, which ultimately governs the spectral bias.
This observation leads to the following proposition.
Proposition 1(Data-Agnostic Spectral Bias in
ReLU-MLPs).For a ReLU-MLP with fixed architec-
ture and initialization, the spectral distribution of its NTK,
and consequently its spectral bias, remains invariant with
respect to the number of training samplesN.
As an empirical validation, in Fig. 3, we plot the eigen-
value spectra of NTKs for MLPs with 1, 3, and 5 layers,
computed fromN=64,512, and4096equally spaced sam-
ples in[0,1]. We observe that deeper MLPs exhibit distinct
spectral profiles, while varying the number of training sam-
ples leaves the spectrum essentially unchanged.
3.4. Preliminaries: In-Context Learning Model
In-context learning (ICL) models, such as TabPFN [20],
typically employ a Transformer-based architecture. Dur-
ing pretraining, the model is exposed to a large number of
synthetic tasks with known target functions, allowing it to
learn a shared prior over the underlying data-generating pro-
cesses. The pretraining objective is to predict the output for
a new queryx ∗ given a small context setC={(x i, yi)}N
i=1:
min
θ
Ep(C,x∗,y∗)

−logp θ(y∗ |x ∗,C)

.
Once pretrained, the model parameters are fixed, and the
model can be viewed as a functiong(q;D)that performs
1 4095Eigen-index (k)
10 7
100Normalized eigenvalue
Empirical context kernel eigenvalues
# samples
64
128
256
512
1024
2048
4096
Figure 4. Eigenvalue decay profiles of the empirical context ker-
nel for TabPFN across multiple sampling densities. The spectra
clearly depend on the number of samples: higher sampling densi-
ties result in larger effective ranks and slower eigenvalue decay.
This behavior contrasts with the sample-invariance observed in
NTK spectra of classical MLPs, highlighting the sample-adaptive
nature of the TabPFN context kernel.
in-context inference. Given a new context setD, the model
predicts outputs for query pointsqvia a single forward pass
through the Transformer, without any gradient updates.
3.5. Context Kernel & Spectral Adaptivity
In-context learning (ICL) models predict query outputsq i
through a single forward pass, without gradient-based pa-
rameter updates. Hence, computing the Neural Tangent
Kernel (NTK), which relies on derivatives with respect
to model parameters, is not meaningful for these models.
However, the NTK conceptually measures how model pre-
dictions change in response to variations in training labels,
mediated via network weights. Following this intuition, we
define an analogous quantity for ICL models that directly
captures the sensitivity of query outputs to context labels.
Definition 1(Context Kernel).Given an in-context learn-
ing (ICL) modelg: (X q,X c,y c)7→ ˆyq, we define itscon-
text kernelas the Jacobian of the predicted query outputs
with respect to the context labels:
Kcontext := ∂g(X q;X c,y c)
∂yc
∈R M×N ,(3)
whereM=|X q|is the number of query points andN=|X c|
is the number of context points.
The exact form ofK context is generally intractable.
However, intuition can be gained from a single-layer atten-
tion block. Let the Transformer compute query outputs as
ˆyq =softmax
 QqK⊤
c√
d

yc,(4)
4

whereQ q=XqWQ,K c=XcWK. The context kernel can
be approximated as
Kcontext = ∂ ˆyq
∂yc
=softmax
 QqK⊤
c√
d

.(5)
Unlike ReLU-based MLPs, whose NTK remains fixed
after initialization, the Transformer’s attention mechanism
induces an input-dependentK context, which varies with the
similarity structure and number of context samplesN.
Proposition 2.The context kernelK context of an ICL
model, defined as the Jacobian of the predicted output with
respect to the context labels, depends on the number of con-
text samplesN. AsNincreases, its spectrum becomes pro-
gressively flatter and approaches the identity:
lim
N→∞
Kcontext = ∂g(X;X,y)
∂y →I.(6)
To emperically validate this, in Fig. 4, we plot the eigen-
value spectra of context kernels for TabPFN computed from
N= 64,512, and4096equally spaced samples in[0,1].
We observe that the spectrum flattens asNincreases, in
contrast to the near sample-invariance observed for NTKs
of ReLU MLPs.
Remark 2(Spectral Adaptivity).The frequency response
of an in-context learning model (e.g., TabPFN) depends on
both its parameterization and the number of context sam-
ples. Given a fixed pretrained model, increasing the num-
ber of context samples expands its range of representable
frequencies. With few samples, the model captures only low-
frequency components; with more samples, it can represent
higher-frequency components. We refer to this phenomenon
asspectral adaptivity.
4. Synthetic Experiments
In this section, we use controlled synthetic experiments to
analyse the spectral behaviour of TabPFN and ReLU MLPs,
and to validate the proposed concept ofspectral adaptiv-
ity. Specifically, we study how their frequency responses
evolve under varying numbers of training epochs (spectral
bias) and sample densities (spectral adaptivity). We define
the target function as
y= sin(2πkx+φ),(7)
where the frequencykis geometrically sampled between
0.5and20, and the phaseφis uniformly sampled in[0,2π].
We compare TabPFN v2 against MLPs with1,3, and5hid-
den layers of width128, trained using the Adam optimiser
with a learning rate of3×10 −3 and no weight decay. The
output magnitude at each frequency component is reported
as thespectral gain.
Algorithm 1TabPFN Patch Denoising
Require:Noisy imageI, patch sizeP
Ensure:Denoised image ˆI
1: ˆIdenoised ←0
2:for allpatchesI patch do
3:foreach channelch∈R, G, Bdo
4:y noisy ←pixel values ofI patch, ch
5:Initialize TabPFN regressorf
6:Fitfon(X coords, ynoisy)
7:Predict denoisedˆy=f(X coords)
8: ˆIdenoised, patch, ch =ˆy
9:end for
10:end for
11:return ˆIDenoised
4.1. Varying Number of Epochs
We first examine the effect of optimisation steps on the
spectral behaviour of ReLU MLPs and TabPFN. Here,256
training samples are uniformly spaced between0and1, and
2048test samples are used for evaluation. TabPFN does not
involve gradient-based optimisation, so its result directly re-
flects its inherent spectral capacity, independent of training
epochs. MLPs are trained for100,300,1000,3000, and
10000epochs. As shown in Fig. 5, the frequency responses
of MLPs gradually evolve with training, confirming their
training-dependentspectral bias. The spectral response of
TabPFN is comparable to that of a well-trained deep MLP.
4.2. Varying Number of Training Samples
We next vary the number of training samples from256to
8192, uniformly sampled from[0,1], and evaluate on16384
test points. All MLPs are trained for1000epochs. As
shown in Fig. 6, the spectral response of TabPFN contin-
ues to evolve as the number of training points increases,
exhibiting stronger responses to higher frequencies as the
sampling density increases. This stands in stark contrast
to MLPs, whose spectral responses remain effectively un-
changed. These results empirically validate our theoreti-
cal claim that in-context learning models possessspectral
adaptivity: their effective spectral bandwidth expands with
the number of in-context samples.
5. TabPFN for Image Denoising
We adapt the image denoising pipeline from [45] to test
TabPFN performance on a common signal reconstruction
task. The denoising pipeline involves using a full set of
training coordinatesxwith labels corrupted by measure-
ment noiseˆy=y+ϵ. When trained under an implicit
neural network the objective is to minimize the loss:
L=∥f θ(x)−ˆy∥(8)
5

100 101
Frequency
0
1Spectral Gain
T abPFN vs Depth-1 MLP 
100 101
Frequency
0
1Spectral Gain
T abPFN vs Depth-3 MLP 
100 101
Frequency
0
1Spectral Gain
T abPFN vs Depth-5 MLP 
T abPFN        MLP depth: 1 3 5 100 ep 300 ep 1k ep 3k ep 10k ep    MLP training epochs
Figure 5. Spectral gain curves for TabPFN and ReLU MLPs with 1, 3, and 5 layers, evaluated across different training epochs. Each
coloured curve corresponds to an MLP trained for a different number of epochs, illustrating how higher frequencies are learned progres-
sively later during optimisation - a phenomenon commonly referred to as spectral bias. The black curve shows TabPFN’s spectral response,
which already matches that of a well-trained deep MLP.
4 16 64 256 1024 40968192
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
ReLU-MLP (Depth 1) 
4 16 64 256 1024 40968192
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
ReLU-MLP (Depth 3) 
4 16 64 256 1024 40968192
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
ReLU-MLP (Depth 5) 
4 16 64 256 1024 40968192
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
T abPFN 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Spectral GainNyquist sampling rate
Figure 6. Spectral gain heatmaps for TabPFN and ReLU MLPs with 1, 3, and 5 layers, evaluated across different number of training
samples. Darker regions indicate higher spectral gain (successful reconstruction). The red dashed line denotes the Nyquist sampling limit,
above which no method can theoretically recover frequencies. The spectrum of MLPs does not change with the number of samples, except
for low-frequency regions truncated by the Nyquist limit. In contrast, TabPFN continues to recover higher frequencies as the number of
samples increases, demonstrating its spectral adaptivity.
As perfect reconstruction including the additive noise is
not desired, this acts as a test for the implicit regulariza-
tion, inductive biases, and signal filtering behavior of dif-
ferent network types. We want to compare how TabPFN
would perform under this scenario. We choose a (678,
1020, 3) target image from the WIRE test [45]. As the total
number of pixels exceeds TabPFNv2’s maximum context
window, we employ a patching strategy described in Al-
gorithm 1 which and predict TabPFN separately for each
set of coordinates and channel. Similar chunking strate-
gies have recently been employed to extend TabPFN be-
yond its context window for tabular tasks [50]. For our pur-
poses, this reflects an in-context forward pass for the tuple
(xpatch,ˆy;xpatch) where the test and train data is the same.
Note that no model training is occurring - the model re-
mains fixed across the patches. In contrast, a single implicit
neural representation would not be able to employ a similar
patching strategy without costly retraining on each individ-
ual patch - or employing potentially dozens or hundreds of
patch-specific models in a kiloNeRF style voxelization [44].
Fig. 7 shows the qualitative results of the denoising. We
can note that despite operating wholly through in-context
predictions that TabPFN denoises favourably when com-
pared to leading implicit neural representations including
WIRE [45], MFN [12], Gaussian activated networks [41],
and RELU+Positional Encoding learned through gradient
descent. In addition, we can note that TabPFN does not sim-
ply act as a naive low-pass filter - while it shows a spectral
bias towards low-pass frequencies it still learns high fre-
quency components, through its sampling consistent with
our theoretical discussion.
6. TabPFN with Positional Encoding
Positional encodings (e.g., Random Fourier Features [39])
are widely used in implicit neural representations (INRs)
to enrich the spectral expressivity of ReLU-MLPs [42, 53].
Here, we investigate how positional encodings influence
6

RELU
PSNR: 22.60 dB
GAUSS
PSNR: 25.16 dB
RELU + PE
PSNR: 27.05 dB
(a) ReLU (b) Gaussian Activation [41] (c) ReLU+PE
MFN
PSNR: 28.38 dB
WIRE
PSNR: 29.48 dB
TABPFN
PSNR: 31.70 dB
(d) MFN [12] (e) WIRE [45] (f) TabPFNv2 [21]
Figure 7. Comparison of neural implicit image reconstruction across common activation functions and architectures. Each subplot shows
the reconstructed image of an example scene corrupted with noise. For each method, the top-right inset displays a spatial zoom highlighting
local texture fidelity, and the bottom-right inset shows the log-magnitude 2D Fourier spectrum, revealing frequency content captured by
the model. PSNR values (dB) are reported below each image. Overall, WIRE and TabPFNv2 recover sharper spatial details and preserve
higher-frequency components, while ReLU variants exhibit pronounced low-frequency smoothing without positional encoding.
T abPFN
0.75× Nyquist
 1.0× Nyquist
 2.0× Nyquist
 8.0× Nyquist
Ground Truth
Reconstruction
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
T abPFN + RFF
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Figure 8. 1D signal reconstruction across sampling rates. Top: TabPFN using raw coordinate inputs. Bottom: TabPFN with Random
Fourier Feature positional encoding. As sampling density increases, TabPFN progressively recovers higher-frequency content. Fourier
Features substantially improves reconstruction for sampling below the Shannon-Nyquist limit (2fwherefis the maximum frequency).
the spectral behavior of TabPFN. We begin with a 1D
curve-fitting experiment using several types of positional
encodings. We evaluate models under sampling densi-
ties both below and above the Shannon-Nyquist rate. As
shown in Fig. 8, positional encodings substantially improve
the approximation quality when the sampling rate is be-
low Nyquist. Next, we apply Random Fourier Feature
(RFF) encodings with varying bandwidths, which modu-
late the effective input frequency content. As illustrated in
Fig. 9, increasing the encoding scale systematically shifts
TabPFN’s frequency response: larger bandwidths amplify
high-frequency components and reduce the number of sam-
ples required to recover fine-scale details. This demon-
strates that TabPFN’s spectral adaptivity can be further ad-
7

4 16 64 256 1024 4096
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
T abPFN (no PE) 
4 16 64 256 1024 4096
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
T abPFN (with PE scale=0.1) 
4 16 64 256 1024 4096
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
T abPFN (with PE scale=0.3) 
4 16 64 256 1024 4096
Training samples
1
8
64Frequency
T abPFN (with PE scale=1.0) 
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Spectral GainNyquist sampling rate
Figure 9. Effect of RFF positional encodings on TabPFN’s spectral behaviour. Increasing the encoding scale enables TabPFN to recover
progressively higher frequencies using fewer samples. Low-scale encodings yield mild improvements over the no-PE baseline, whereas
medium- and high-scale encodings substantially expand the recoverable bandwidth. These results demonstrate that RFF encodings modu-
late TabPFN’s inductive bias and further enhance its spectral adaptivity.
101 102 103 104
Training samples
0
10
20
30
40
50
60Frequency
T abPFN v2
T abPFN v2.5
T abPFN v2 (rff scale=0.1)
T abPFN v2 (rff scale=1.0)
Figure 10. Frequency capacity of TabPFN under varying num-
bers of training samples. We report the highest recoverable fre-
quency (the first frequency with spectral gain≤0.95) for TabPFN
v2, TabPFN v2.5, and TabPFN v2 augmented with RFF positional
encodings of different bandwidths. Spectral adaptivity, where re-
coverable frequency increases with sampling density, emerges as a
general property of TabPFN-based in-context learning, and can be
tuned through different pretraining strategies and input encodings.
justed through input-encoding design, analogous to fre-
quency modulation techniques used in coordinate-based
networks. Finally, Fig. 10 plots the recoverable frequency
versus the number of training samples. We additionally use
this experiment to test the recently released TabPFNv2.5
[18] We observe that: (a) different pretrained TabPFN mod-
els (v2 and v2.5) exhibit distinct levels of spectral adap-
tivity, but both show the sample-based adaption consistent
with our analysis; (b) different input frequency encoding
scales can induce different spectral profiles; and (c) for
a fixed parametrization, the recoverable frequency consis-
tently increases with the number of samples. These results
collectively highlight spectral adaptivity as a common at-
tribute of TabPFN-based in-context learning.
7. Conclusion and Limitations
This work reframes TabPFN as a model whose inductive
bias is not fixed by its architecture, but is instead shaped by
the data provided in-context. Through the lens of the con-
text kernel, we show that TabPFN exhibitsspectral adap-
tivity- its effective bandwidth expands as the sampling den-
sity of the prompt increases. This is in contrast to the
architecture-governed spectral behavior of ReLU MLPs and
INRs, whose frequency profiles remain largely unchanged
once the model is specified. Across 1D reconstruction
and image denoising, we find that TabPFN can recover in-
creasingly high-frequency structure without iterative opti-
mization, and that positional encodings serve as predictable
mechanisms for steering its frequency response.
Our analysis inherits several limitations of the underly-
ing model. TabPFN and related PFNs remain constrained
by context-window size and input dimensionality [18, 37],
which limits the spatial resolution and signal complexity of
the vision tasks we can evaluate. The patching strategy used
in our 2D experiments, while effective, introduces blend-
ing artefacts that are absent in globally trained INRs. Fur-
thermore, our context-kernel interpretation relies on a lo-
cal linearization of a nonlinear transformer, leaving open
how spectral adaptivity emerges from full attention dynam-
ics and the structure of the pretraining distribution.
Even so, the adaptive-spectral perspective suggests a
broader design space for in-context models. If spectral be-
havior can be influenced by context geometry, positional
encodings, and synthetic pretraining tasks - not solely by
model architecture - then PFNs offer a path toward training-
8

free signal models whose inductive biases evolve with the
data they are given. Extending this idea to larger contexts,
multi-scale visual signals, and temporally evolving prompts
may connect tabular foundation models with implicit neural
representations in a way that enables fast, adaptive recon-
struction without gradient descent.
Acknowledgments
This research publication was supported in part by the
CommBank Centre for Foundational AI Research.
References
[1] Devansh Arpit, Stanisław Jastrz˛ ebski, Nicolas Ballas, David
Krueger, Emmanuel Bengio, Maxinder S. Kanwal, Tegan
Maharaj, Asja Fischer, Aaron Courville, Yoshua Bengio, and
Simon Lacoste-Julien. A closer look at memorization in deep
networks. InProceedings of the 34th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 233–242. PMLR, 2017.
3
[2] Ronen Basri, Meirav Galun, Amnon Geifman, David Jacobs,
Yoni Kasten, and Shira Kritchman. Frequency bias in neural
networks for input of non-uniform density. InProceedings
of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 685–694. PMLR, 2020. 3
[3] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Sub-
biah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakan-
tan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sand-
hini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom
Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler,
Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric
Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford,
Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models are
few-shot learners. InAdvances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2020. 2
[4] Steven L Brunton and J Nathan Kutz.Data-driven science
and engineering: Machine learning, dynamical systems, and
control. Cambridge University Press, 2022. 2
[5] Sibo Cai, Xi Sun, and Hui Zhong. Explore the time series
forecasting potential of tabpfn leveraging the intrinsic peri-
odicity of data. In1st ICML Workshop on Foundation Mod-
els for Structured Data. 2
[6] Yuan Cao, Zhiying Fang, Yue Wu, Ding-Xuan Zhou, and
Quanquan Gu. Towards understanding the spectral bias of
deep learning, 2020. 3
[7] Shin-Fang Chng, Ravi Garg, Hemanth Saratchandran, and
Simon Lucey. Invertible neural warp for nerf. InEuropean
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 405–421. Springer,
2024. 3
[8] Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan Ma,
Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Tianyu Liu,
Baobao Chang, Xu Sun, Lei Li, and Zhifang Sui. A survey
on in-context learning, 2024. 2
[9] Dmitry Eremeev, Gleb Bazhenov, Oleg Platonov, Artem
Babenko, and Liudmila Prokhorenkova. Turning tabular
foundation models into graph foundation models, 2025. 2
[10] Nick Erickson, Lennart Purucker, Andrej Tschalzev, David
Holzmüller, Prateek Mutalik Desai, David Salinas, and
Frank Hutter. Tabarena: A living benchmark for machine
learning on tabular data.arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.16791,
2025. 2
[11] Amer Essakine, Yanqi Cheng, Chun-Wun Cheng, Lipei
Zhang, Zhongying Deng, Lei Zhu, Carola-Bibiane Schön-
lieb, and Angelica I Aviles-Rivero. Where do we stand with
implicit neural representations? a technical and performance
survey, 2025. 2
[12] Rizal Fathony, Anit Kumar Sahu, Devin Willmott, and J Zico
Kolter. Multiplicative filter networks. InInternational Con-
ference on Learning Representations, 2021. 6, 7
[13] Benjamin Feuer, Chinmay Hegde, and Niv Cohen. Scaling
tabpfn: Sketching and feature selection for tabular prior-data
fitted networks, 2023. 2
[14] Benjamin Feuer, Robin Tibor Schirrmeister, Valeriia
Cherepanova, Chinmay Hegde, Frank Hutter, Micah Gold-
blum, Niv Cohen, and Colin White. Tunetables: Context
optimization for scalable prior-data fitted networks.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.11137, 2024. 2
[15] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Raphael Gontijo-Lopes, and Rebecca
Roelofs. Spectral bias in practice: The role of function fre-
quency in generalization, 2022. 3
[16] Kyle Gao, Yina Gao, Hongjie He, Dening Lu, Linlin Xu,
and Jonathan Li. Nerf: Neural radiance field in 3d vision:
A comprehensive review (updated post-gaussian splatting),
2025. 2
[17] Eugene Golikov, Eduard Pokonechnyy, and Vladimir Korvi-
akov. Neural tangent kernel: A survey, 2022. 3
[18] Léo Grinsztajn, Klemens Flöge, Oscar Key, Felix Birkel,
Brendan Roof, Phil Jund, Benjamin Jäger, Adrian Hayler,
Dominik Safaric, Felix Jablonski Simone Alessi, Mihir
Manium, Rosen Yu, Anurag Garg, Jake Robertson, Shi
Bin (Liam) Hoo, Vladyslav Moroshan, Magnus Bühler,
Lennart Purucker, Clara Cornu, Lilly Charlotte Wehrhahn,
Alessandro Bonetto, Sauraj Gambhir, Noah Hollmann, and
Frank Hutter. Tabpfn-2.5: Advancing the state of the art in
tabular foundation models, 2025. 2, 8
[19] Adrian Hayler, Xingyue Huang, Ismail Ilkan Ceylan,
Michael M. Bronstein, and Ben Finkelshtein. Of graphs and
tables: Zero-shot node classification with tabular foundation
models. InNew Perspectives in Graph Machine Learning,
2025. 2
[20] Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Katharina Eggensperger,
and Frank Hutter. Tabpfn: A transformer that solves small
tabular classification problems in a second. InInternational
Conference on Learning Representations 2023, 2023. 1, 2, 4
[21] Noah Hollmann, Samuel Müller, Lennart Purucker, Ar-
jun Krishnakumar, Max Körfer, Shi Bin Hoo, Robin Tibor
Schirrmeister, and Frank Hutter. Accurate predictions on
small data with a tabular foundation model.Nature, 2025.
1, 2, 7
9

[22] Shi Bin Hoo, Samuel Müller, David Salinas, and Frank Hut-
ter. From tables to time: How tabpfn-v2 outperforms spe-
cialized time series forecasting models, 2025. 2
[23] Arthur Jacot, Franck Gabriel, and Clément Hongler. Neu-
ral tangent kernel: Convergence and generalization in neural
networks.Advances in neural information processing sys-
tems, 31, 2018. 3
[24] Jun-Peng Jiang, Si-Yang Liu, Hao-Run Cai, Qile Zhou, and
Han-Jia Ye. Representation Learning for Tabular Data: A
Comprehensive Survey, 2025. 1, 2
[25] Xin Li, Pei Gao, Jian Zhou, Xinyue Xu, and Xiyao Li. Ar-
chitectural bias vs. feature engineering: Deconstructing the
limits of tabular foundation models in traffic forecasting. In
Proceedings of the 2025 International Conference on Simu-
lation, Modeling and Big Data, page 369–380, New York,
NY , USA, 2025. Association for Computing Machinery. 2
[26] Simon Lucey. Gradient descent as a shrinkage operator for
spectral bias, 2025. 2
[27] Junwei Ma, Valentin Thomas, Guangwei Yu, and Anthony
Caterini. In-context data distillation with tabpfn, 2024. 2
[28] Calvin McCarter. What exactly has tabpfn learned to do?,
2025. 2
[29] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-
bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks:
Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. InProceed-
ings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), 2019. 2
[30] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. InECCV, 2020. 2
[31] Samuel Müller, Noah Hollmann, Sebastian Pineda Arango,
Josif Grabocka, and Frank Hutter. Transformers can do
bayesian inference. InInternational Conference on Learn-
ing Representations, 2022. 1, 2
[32] Thomas Nagler. Statistical foundations of prior-data fitted
networks. InProceedings of the 40th International Con-
ference on Machine Learning, pages 25660–25676. PMLR,
2023. 2
[33] Ali Nawaz, Amir Ahmad, and Shehroz S. Khan. Assessing
the robustness of tabular prior-data fitted network classifier.
In1st ICML Workshop on Foundation Models for Structured
Data, 2025. 2
[34] H. Nyquist. Certain topics in telegraph transmission theory.
Transactions of the American Institute of Electrical Engi-
neers, 47(2):617–644, 1928. 2
[35] Madhur Panwar, Kabir Ahuja, and Navin Goyal. In-context
learning and bayesian inference. InR0-FoMo:Robustness of
Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning in Large Foundation Mod-
els, 2023. 2
[36] Vasileios Papastergios and Anastasios Gounaris. Out in the
wild: Investigating the impact of imperfect data on a tabular
foundation model.Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment.
ISSN, 2150:8097. 2
[37] Jingang Qu, David Holzmüller, Gaël Varoquaux, and Ma-
rine Le Morvan. Tabicl: A tabular foundation model
for in-context learning on large data.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.05564, 2025. 2, 8
[38] Nasim Rahaman, Aristide Baratin, Devansh Arpit, Felix
Draxler, Min Lin, Fred Hamprecht, Yoshua Bengio, and
Aaron Courville. On the spectral bias of neural networks.
InProceedings of the 36th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, pages 5301–5310. PMLR, 2019. 1, 3
[39] Ali Rahimi and Benjamin Recht. Random features for large-
scale kernel machines. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc., 2007. 6
[40] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G.E. Karniadakis. Physics-
informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for
solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear
partial differential equations.Journal of Computational
Physics, 378:686–707, 2019. 2
[41] Sameera Ramasinghe and Simon Lucey. Beyond periodicity:
Towards a unifying framework for activations in coordinate-
mlps. InComputer Vision – ECCV 2022, pages 142–158,
Cham, 2022. Springer Nature Switzerland. 6, 7
[42] Sameera Ramasinghe, Lachlan E MacDonald, and Simon
Lucey. On the frequency-bias of coordinate-mlps.Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:796–
809, 2022. 3, 6
[43] Sameera Ramasinghe, Hemanth Saratchandran, Violetta
Shevchenko, and Simon Lucey. On the effectiveness of neu-
ral priors in modeling dynamical systems.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.05728, 2023. 2
[44] Christian Reiser, Songyou Peng, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas
Geiger. Kilonerf: Speeding up neural radiance fields with
thousands of tiny mlps. InInternational Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV), 2021. 6
[45] Vishwanath Saragadam, Daniel LeJeune, Jasper Tan, Guha
Balakrishnan, Ashok Veeraraghavan, and Richard G Bara-
niuk. Wire: Wavelet implicit neural representations. InConf.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023. 5, 6, 7
[46] Hemanth Saratchandran, Shin-Fang Chng, Sameera Ramas-
inghe, Lachlan MacDonald, and Simon Lucey. Curvature-
aware training for coordinate networks. InProceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 13328–13338, 2023. 1, 3
[47] Hemanth Saratchandran, Sameera Ramasinghe, and Simon
Lucey. From activation to initialization: Scaling insights for
optimizing neural fields. InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 413–422, 2024. 1
[48] Hemanth Saratchandran, Sameera Ramasinghe, Violetta
Shevchenko, Alexander Long, and Simon Lucey. A sam-
pling theory perspective on activations for implicit neural
representations, 2024. 3
[49] David Schiff, Ofir Lindenbaum, and Yonathan Efroni. Gra-
dient free deep reinforcement learning with tabpfn, 2025. 2
[50] Renat Sergazinov and Shao-An Yin. Chunked tabpfn: Ex-
act training-free in-context learning for long-context tabular
data, 2025. 2, 6
[51] C.E. Shannon. Communication in the presence of noise.Pro-
ceedings of the IRE, 37(1):10–21, 1949. 2
[52] Vincent Sitzmann, Julien N.P. Martel, Alexander W.
Bergman, David B. Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Implicit
neural representations with periodic activation functions. In
arXiv, 2020. 2
10

[53] Matthew Tancik, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara
Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh Singhal, Ravi Ra-
mamoorthi, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier fea-
tures let networks learn high frequency functions in low di-
mensional domains, 2020. 6
[54] Zifeng Wang, Chufan Gao, Cao Xiao, and Jimeng Sun. Med-
itab: Scaling medical tabular data predictors via data consol-
idation, enrichment, and refinement, 2024. 2
[55] Lechao Xiao, Jeffrey Pennington, and Samuel Schoenholz.
Disentangling trainability and generalization in deep neural
networks. InInternational Conference on Machine Learn-
ing, pages 10462–10472. PMLR, 2020. 3
[56] Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and
Tengyu Ma. An explanation of in-context learning as im-
plicit bayesian inference, 2022. 2
[57] Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany,
Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico Tombari, James Tomp-
kin, Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in
visual computing and beyond. InComputer graphics forum,
pages 641–676. Wiley Online Library, 2022. 1, 2
[58] Zhiqin John Xu. Understanding training and generalization
in deep learning by fourier analysis, 2018. 3
[59] Zhi-Qin John Xu, Yaoyu Zhang, and Yanyang Xiao. Train-
ing behavior of deep neural network in frequency domain.
InNeural Information Processing, pages 264–274, Cham,
2019. Springer International Publishing. 3
[60] Han-Jia Ye, Si-Yang Liu, and Wei-Lun Chao. A closer look
at tabPFN v2: Understanding its strengths and extending its
capabilities. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems, 2025. 2
[61] Jianqiao Zheng, Sameera Ramasinghe, and Simon Lucey.
Rethinking positional encoding, 2021. 3
11

From Tables to Signals: Revealing Spectral Adaptivity in TabPFN
Supplementary Material
A. TabPFN Attention Structure
A key question left open by the context-kernel analysis
is how TabPFN’s internal representations change as more
in-context samples are provided. In Sec. 3.5, we defined
the context kernel and plotted its empirical version for
TabPFN in Main Paper Fig. 4, since the true kernel is
generally intractable. As TabPFN is Transformer-based,
its context kernel depends on the self-attention mecha-
nism shown in Eq. (5). We therefore examine the model’s
attention patterns directly, as they are the main mecha-
nism through which TabPFN modulates interactions be-
tween context points and thus its spectral capacity. This
section provides results examining how TabPFN’s attention
maps (n×n) evolve with the number of in-context samples.
These visualizations complement the main paper by show-
ing how internal attention mechanisms become sharper and
more expressive as the sampling density increases.
A.1. Spectral Structure of Attention Maps via SVD
To obtain a quantitative view of how TabPFN’s internal in-
teractions become more expressive as the context grows, we
analyse the spectral structure of its attention maps via sin-
gular value decomposition (SVD). Fig. 1 reports the sin-
gular value spectra of Layer 8 attention maps across the
same range of sample sizes. The singular value spec-
trum broadens with additional in-context samples, indicat-
ing higher-rank attention maps and richer internal represen-
tations. This trend mirrors the rise in recoverable frequen-
cies reported in the main text and further supports the inter-
pretation of TabPFN exhibitingspectral adaptivityat both
representation and attention levels.
A.2. Self-Attention Maps Across Layers
We can visualize self-attention maps to observe whether in-
creasing sample density leads to progressively sharper and
more localized attention neighborhoods, as would be ex-
pected from a model whose inductive bias adapts to sam-
pling resolution. Fig. 2 presents self-attention maps for lay-
ers 1, 4, 8, and 12 of TabPFN under context sample sizes
ranging from64to4096. All attention matrices are aver-
aged over 6 heads and subsampled to64×64for consistent
visual comparison. We observe that as the number of sam-
ples increases, the maps exhibit increasingly structured and
localized patterns, reflecting the formation of more selec-
tive attention neighborhoods and aligning with the sample-
dependent behavior observed in the spectral experiments.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Index (k)
10 2
10 1
100
Normalized singular value
SVD of attention maps from layer 8
n_sample=64
n_sample=256
n_sample=512
n_sample=1024
n_sample=4096
Figure 1. Singular value decomposition of Layer 8 self-attention
maps (subsampled to same size of64×64from sample size) com-
puted over different numbers of context samples (64–4096). As
shown in Fig. 2, the attention maps become increasingly sharp
and structured with more samples. The SVD results provide a
quantitative view of this trend: attention maps obtain progressively
richer spectra as the number of context samples increases, indicat-
ing higher-rank and more expressive attention patterns.
1

Layer 1
Samples: 64
 Samples: 256
 Samples: 512
 Samples: 1024
 Samples: 4096
Layer 4
Layer 8
Layer 12
0.010 0.015 0.020 0.025 0.030
Self-Attention Maps between Context Samples
Figure 2. Self-attention maps of TabPFN across transformer layers and different numbers of context samples. Columns correspond to
context sample sizes (64,256,512,1024,4096), and rows correspond to Layers 1, 4, 8, and 12. All attention maps are averaged over 6
heads and subsampled to64×64for consistent visual comparison. As sampling increases, the attention maps become sharper, more struc-
tured, and more concentrated around local neighborhoods. These qualitative changes reflect the model’s increasingly expressive internal
representations and complement the quantitative SVD analysis in Fig. 1, evidencing TabPFN’s sample-dependent attention behavior.
2

B. Denoising Patch Size Ablation
In Section 5 we showed that TabPFN can perform im-
age denoising competitively with leading INR methods.
Because TabPFN is limited to a 10,000 sample context
window, we adopted the patching strategy in Algorithm
1. Here we examine how patch size affects performance
and whether TabPFN’s strong results arise from operating
on small patches. We evaluate TabPFN and all baselines
across a range of patch sizes. For TabPFN, we test patches
from 20-200 pixels (extending beyond its recommended
100 pixel limit) and vary the number of regressors (n= 1
and the defaultn= 8) to assess the effect of ensembling.
INR methods are evaluated using patch sizes from 20-1000
pixels, training each patch independently with the same hy-
perparameters as in Section 5. Results are shown in Fig. 4.
TabPFN exhibits consistently strong performance within its
context window and degrades only mildly once this limit
is exceeded. By contrast, INR performance depends heav-
ily on patch size, with larger patches generally required for
high quality results. This sensitivity likely reflects overfit-
ting on small patches or a need to retune hyperparameters
across patch sizes for best performance - issues that TabPFN
avoids. Overall, TabPFN outperforms all baselines in both
PSNR and runtime. To evaluate performance independent
of patch size, Fig. 3 reports the maximum PSNR attained by
each method. Increasing the number of TabPFN regressors
fromn= 1ton= 8provides only marginal improvements,
while substantially increasing computational cost.
WIRE SIREN MFN ReLU ReLU
(PE)
Gauss T abPFN
(n=1)
T abPFN
(n=8)
24
26
28
30
32PSNR (dB)
Figure 3. Maximum PSNR achieved by each method across all
patch sizes in Fig. 4. TabPFN attains the highest PSNR overall,
performing strongly even with a single regressor and showing only
minor additional gains with an ensemble (n= 8).
102
Patch Size
18
20
22
24
26
28
30
32PSNR
WIRE
SIREN
MFN
ReLU
ReLU+PE
Gauss
T abPFN (n=1)
T abPFN (n=8)
102
Patch Size
102
103
104
Time (s)
WIRE
SIREN
MFN
ReLU
ReLU+PE
Gauss
T abPFN (n=1)
T abPFN (n=8)
Figure 4. Patch-size ablation for TabPFN-based denoising. We
vary patch size and report PSNR (top) and runtime (bottom). The
gray region marks patch sizes that exceed TabPFN’s 100 pixel con-
text limit. TabPFN achieves strong PSNR even with small patches
and remains stable up to its limit, while INR baselines require
larger patches to reach peak performance. Runtime decreases for
all methods as patch size increases, but TabPFN reaches its mini-
mum near the recommended context limit and rises once this win-
dow is exceeded. Increasing the number of TabPFN regressors
(n= 8) yields only small PSNR gains but increases runtime.
3